Cần có một bài riêng về cái này vì nó khá rộng
### であります
**`であります` is obviously `である` with the `ます` helper verb attached.**
### でござる 
**`でござる` -- `ござる` is simply a polite, keigo version of `ある`, the verb of being.** **So `ござる / ご座る` is just `ある` in fancy form.** **You won't hear `でござる` very much at all because since it's an honorific form****these days it's nearly always used with the `ます` helper verb attached.** But you will hear `ござる` perhaps in period drama and things like that. **It's samurai talk.**
### でございます
`でございます` is the form of the copula that's used in keigo so you'll hear it in shops, you'll hear it in public announcements 

### Chính ló である
You could call it, in a way, **the `straight copula`.** **`だ` sounds casual, `です` is polite, but `である` is just the copula.** (Bản thân nó chỉ đơn giản là một hệ từ, không hơn không kém). Được dùng trong các văn bản học thuật, báo chí các thứ.

Bạn chỉ có thể dùng だ and です ở cuối mệnh đề logic. Cùng lắm thì ta có thể đặt danh tính từ (adjectival noun) + な kiểu như `花が**綺麗だ**` (flower **pretty-is**) thì thành `**綺麗な**花` (**pretty-is** flower).

So, suppose we want to say `Sakura **who is** a university student`. Now, we can say `大学生**の**さくら`, which is `the university student Sakura`. But suppose we don't want to say that. **Suppose we actually want to say `Sakura who is a university student`?** _(make a relative clause)_. So we say `大学生**である**さくら`. _(Sakura **who is** a university student)_ (Chỉ có mỗi cách này vì だ and です không làm được kiểu này). Hoặc **or example, if you want to say `the state of being round`**, you would say `円形**である**さま`. Now, **`さま` is a state or condition.****We can't really use の here; `円形のさま` doesn't really work.** So we really have to say `円形**である**さま`.