### など

など essentially means pretty much what etcetera means in English, but the thing to bear in mind in formal language is that it has higher status than etcetera in English. In English, etcetera tends to be treated in many cases as a bit of a cop-out. It's a way of not really saying exactly what you mean. In Japanese it has much higher status. Its meaning spectrum is broader.

**など in informal Japanese**: In informal Japanese, など also has another use, which overlaps with the other two words we're going to look at. It *can be used to mildly denigrate or belittle a word that it's attached to*.

So we might say, `タバコ**など**不要だ`, which means `I've no use for cigarettes`. Now, `タバコは不要だ` would mean the same thing essentially **(notice that `など` knocks out other particles)**.

The only difference here is that など is throwing that slightly disparaging light on cigarettes. **It means I don't need that kind of thing -- that's something I don't need in my life**

### なんか

**So, `なんか` is really a contraction of `何か/なにか` (something)**

And it’s the denigrating one we'll hear sometimes very strongly in cases where... well, let's say in an anime a younger sister is angry with her older sister. She may say, `お姉ちゃん**なんか**大嫌い!` (I really hate **stuff like** my big sister). You're throwing a very disparaging light on what it is you're talking about.

**なんか used with oneself**: And **it often gets used of oneself**, as in `私なんか`, and **this is often used to stress a perceived inferior position** **or a difficult position that one finds oneself in**, for example, `私なんかまるで子供扱いだ` (I'm treated just like a child).

**なんか - contraction of なにか / 何か**: **Now, the fundamental meaning of `なんか`, as I said, is actually** a contraction of `なにか / 何か`, which is `something`.  `**なんか**心配はある?`, which just means `**何か**心配はある` or (Is there **some** worry? Is **anything** worrying you?).

**なんか as `something`, `somewhat` to make things vaguer**: So we might say `**なんか**違う` (**something's** different _/ **something** differs_ -- I'm not sure what it is, but something's different). `なんか違う.`

**なんか as `somehow / for some reason`**: Now, from that it goes on to meaning `somehow`. So we might say `**なんか**好きじゃない` (**somehow**, I don't like it / **For some reason**, I don't like it). `**なんか**好きじゃない`

**なんか in very casual / sloppy speech as kinda x**: So in very casual and (I would say) rather sloppy speech, you can hear なんか at the beginning of a sentence and then several times during the sentence: なんか this, なんか that. And when it's being used like that, it's really being used like kinda or like in English. And, just as in English, this is a sloppy way of talking. It's not good Japanese, but you may hear people talking like this in some anime, etcetera. 
### なんて

**`なんて` is essentially a contraction of `何って`** and I've done another video about this -って, which is a contraction of -と or `-という`.

So, in its simplest and most basic use, it's used, for example, in saying `**なんて**言った?`, which means `**what** did you say?`. English speakers may be tempted to ask `**なにを**いった?` (**what** did you say?). **But that's not natural Japanese.**

**なんて as `What a (this)` or `What a (that)`**: Now, you'll also see it a lot with a meaning of `what` in English as used in expressions like `**What a** nice day!`, `**What a** stupid person!`, `**What a** beautiful flower!` etcetera. **And this is an abbreviation of `なんという / 何という`, but it's more often than not,** **even in not particularly casual speech, used as `なんて`.** `**なんて**美しい景色だ!` (**What** beautiful scenery!)

**なんて used in a belittling manner**: Now, **it's also used**, as we said before, **in this belittling manner attached to a noun.** So, for example, we can say `試験**なんて**嫌いだ` (I hate exams); `お金**なんて**いらない` (I don't want money).

**なんて used to express surprise**: **And it can also be used at the end of a complete statement to express surprise.** It can also be used at the end to express surprise or in some cases disbelief or doubt. So we might say, 冬に燕を見るなんて (see a swallow in winter + なんて). Hoặc một ví dụ khác là (だなんて): >こんなに素敵な物を作り出す人間の世界が悪い**だなんて**信じられない (だと is another good example because it also expresses shock or dismay in the same way that as だなんて)

And finally, **we can use it in a way that comes right back more or less** **to the original meaning of `-という`, but adding a bit of vagueness to it.**

So if we say `山田**なんて**人は知らない`, we're saying `I don't know anyone **called** Yamada`. Now, **the `なんて` here could be replaced simply with `-という`**: `山田**という**人は知らない`. Well, `山田**という**人は知らない` is like saying in English simply `I don't know a person **called** Yamada`. But `山田**なんて**人は知らない` is more like saying `I don't know any character **called** Yamada`.